The Project Gutenberg eBook of "No place like home"
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: "No place like home"

Author: Hesba Stretton

Release date: October 8, 2024 [eBook #74546]

Language: English

Original publication: London: The Religious Tract Society


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK "NO PLACE LIKE HOME" ***

Transcriber's note: Unusual and inconsistent spelling is as printed.

[Illustration]



                        "No Place Like Home"


                                 BY

                          HESBA STRETTON

                             AUTHOR OF

              "JESSICA'S FIRST PRAYER," "CAROLA," &c.



                              LONDON
                    THE RELIGIOUS TRACT SOCIETY
         56 PATERNOSTER ROW AND 65 ST. PAUL'S CHURCHYARD



                         BUTLER & TANNER
                   THE SELWOOD PRINTING WORKS
                       FROME, AND LONDON.



                            CONTENTS.

                         [Illustration]

CHAPTER

   I. AN OLD HOVEL

  II. IN THE WOODS

 III. SATURDAY AND SUNDAY

  IV. THE MAGISTRATES' MEETING

   V. TURNED ADRIFT

  VI. FIVE YEARS

 VII. HER LAST COMMAND

VIII. GOING HOME

  IX. A NEW HOME



                         [Illustration]

                      "NO PLACE LIKE HOME"

CHAPTER I.

AN OLD HOVEL.

THERE was not another home like it in all the parish of Broadmoor. It
was a half-ruined hut, with walls bulging outwards, and a ragged roof
of old thatch, overgrown with moss and yellow stonecrop. A rusty iron
pipe in one corner served as a chimney to the flat hearth, which was
the only fireplace within; and a very small lattice-window of greenish
glass, with a bull's-eye in each pane, let in but little of the summer
sunshine, and hardly a gleam of the winter's gloomy light. Only a few
yards off, the hut could not be distinguished from the ruins of an old
lime-kiln, near which it had been built to shelter the lime-burners
during their intervals of work.

There was but one room downstairs, with an earthen floor trodden hard
by the trampling of heavy feet, whilst under the thatch there was
a little loft, reached by a steep ladder and a square hole in the
ceiling, where the roof came down on each side to the rough flooring,
and nowhere was there height enough for even a short person to stand
upright.

The furniture was as rude and simple as the home itself. The good
household chattels, on which Ruth Medway had prided herself when she
lived in her pretty cottage in the village street, had never come to
this poor hovel. There was a broken chair or two, a table-top propped
upon an unbarked trunk of a young fir-tree from the woods behind the
lime-kiln, a little cracked crockery, two or three old boxes, and the
indispensable saucepan and kettle in which she did all her cooking.
Upstairs was a low pallet bedstead with a flock bed, and, on the floor
beside it, a mattress stuffed with chaff, close under the roof, where
the thatch must almost have touched the sleeper's face. There was no
window into this loft; the only light came through the square hole in
the floor.

"Home is home, be it never so homely;" and Ruth Medway had learned
to love the quiet place where her youngest and her dearest child had
been born. Behind the house lay the Lime-kiln Woods; once a busy place
of quarries and kilns, but left long ago to the growth of trees and
brushwood; the haunt of all kinds of wild woodland creatures, hollow
with rabbit-burrows, and thickly peopled with singing birds, and with
the game that the squire loved to preserve. Excepting in the shooting
season, when the sharp crack of guns was to be heard all day long,
there was no noise to drown the buzz of the humble-bee, and the low
whirring of the unseen grasshopper, and the hundred faint and delicate
sounds which fill the stillness of an unfrequented greenwood. Day and
night, summer and winter, had their special signs and sounds there, all
well-known to Ishmael, the youngest son of old Humphrey Medway.

He was the youngest son, and the most unwelcome to his father. Humphrey
had given but a scanty welcome to his first-born child, and each
successor had been received with growing surliness. Ishmael came the
last, when his mother's hair was already grey, and her back bent with
hard toil at out-door labour. The eldest son was grown up and married,
and the little love he might have once felt for his mother had hardened
into indifference, whilst the other children, those who were living,
were scattered abroad, seldom caring to return home. Humphrey never
mentioned any of them; but sometimes of an evening, when Ruth rested
for a little while, and sat watching the kettle boil on the crackling
fire of sticks, she would count their names over on her fingers; eight
names over which she sighed, but at the ninth her brown wrinkled face
wore a fleeting smile as she muttered, "Ishmael."

On the whole, Ruth was not given to brooding over the past; for she
lived too hard a life to keep her memory green. She had grown fond of
this lonely hut, where Ishmael had been born; and he had never known
any other home. There was nothing in it to prevent him keeping pet
dormice, and hedgehogs found in the hollows of the wood; though the
gamekeeper would not let him have a rabbit, or allow Ruth to keep a
cat; and a dog was not to be thought of. But a tame starling, and the
white owl which had chosen its roost under their thatch, and answered
his call in the dusk, swooping noiselessly through the air, made the
place full of life and interest to him. All the woods behind had been
his play-ground from his earliest childhood; and not the finest house
in Broadmoor could have tempted Ishmael to exchange his home for it.

Ruth had taught herself to read after she was married; when Humphrey
soon began to leave her alone in the evening, and kept her sitting up
late for his return from the village inn. Her loneliness had led her to
reading the Bible—the only book she possessed beside a Prayer-book and
an old collection of hymns. She had learned to believe quite simply,
with no doubt in her inmost heart, that "God so loved the world, that
He gave His only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in Him should
not perish, but have everlasting life;" and that Jesus Christ had
really "given His life as a ransom" for her. With these two thoughts
firmly rooted in her mind she read the Bible eagerly; and it was from
its old well-worn pages she had chosen the name of her youngest and
dearest child, "Ishmael; because the Lord hath heard thy affliction."

Ruth had never been a woman of many words; and she was very silent
about those things which were deepest in her heart. Humphrey was
accustomed to boast himself of her subjection to him, as not daring to
"cheep" a word against him. In her young days she had been one of the
village choir; and now Ishmael sat in the singing gallery in her old
place. It was one of her greatest pleasures to creep just within the
church door, where her poor clothing would be least noticed, and listen
to the voices in the gallery overhead, and to join in singing "Glory be
to the Father" at the close of each familiar Psalm. There her bent back
seemed to ache less, and her wearied limbs felt rested.

Often in the week, as she picked stones or hoed thistles in the
fields, her withered lips would murmur the words, "Glory be to the
Father," and she would feel as a way-worn traveller feels in a hot and
desert country, when he comes across a little fountain of fresh water
springing up in his path. His journey is not over, but the living
waters give him strength to go on with it.

So bad a name did Humphrey and his eldest son bear in the parish,
as being idle and drunken vagabonds, that it overshadowed Ruth and
Ishmael, and they found themselves banished by it from all intercourse
with decent and friendly neighbours. Ishmael did not feel it until
he went to the village school, where the other children were warned
against Humphrey Medway's boy. The women who worked with Ruth in the
fields kept aloof from her; not so much because they were better off
than she was, but because she was so silent in her ways.

Thus there was no companionship for them but in each other; and it was
sufficient. It was enough for Ruth to think of her boy all day, and
to hear his regular healthful breathing beside her all night; and for
Ishmael, the woods that lay all around his home gave him never-ending
occupation and delight.

But though they were without friends, they were not without an enemy.
The nearness of the low hovel to the woods was enough to arouse the
suspicions of the squire's gamekeeper, even if he had had no reason to
dislike Humphrey Medway and his family. But, before Ishmael was born,
there had existed a bitter hatred between Nutkin, the gamekeeper, and
young Humphrey, Ishmael's eldest brother.

Humphrey had succeeded in winning away from Nutkin the girl he had
wished to make his wife; and though the keeper had himself married
shortly afterwards, he had never forgiven the offence, or ceased to
hold him and all belonging to him in bitter enmity. The very name of
Medway was hateful to his ears. Of late, too, Ishmael had won two or
three prizes at the village school over the head of his own boy, who
was about the same age, and who lamented loudly over his defeat by old
Humphrey's despised son.

Yet in spite of all Nutkin's efforts, he had been unable to dislodge
old Humphrey from the miserable hut. The rent of a shilling a week was
paid punctually by Ruth, who would rather have gone without food than
omit its regular settlement, since nothing else could keep her drunken
husband and herself from the parish workhouse. The farmer, who held a
lease of the lime-kiln and the hut, found her work on his farmstead
and showed her some little favour. So all the keeper could do was to
suspect and to watch, ready to take advantage of any trespass that
could be punished by the law.

For thirteen years now Ruth had worked upon the Willows Farm; and many
a hot summer day had Ishmael, when a baby, lain all day long under the
hedgerows, carefully swathed in an old shawl; while his mother toiled
in the harvest fields. He had himself begun to earn a few pence as soon
as he could scare crows from the springing corn, or could help to tend
the sheep in the chilly days of spring during the lambing season.

For the last two years his father had been grumbling at his being an
idle mouth to feed; though it was rarely Ruth saw a penny of his money,
and it had been with difficulty that she had been able to keep her
boy at school. But now the time was come when Ishmael must cease to
be a child, and must begin to get his own living by regular work. Mr.
Chipchase, the farmer, had consented to try him as waggoner's boy; and
had promised if he was a good and steady lad, to "make a man of him."

"Mother," said Ishmael, as they sat together on their door-sill in the
long, light June evening, listening to the cuckoo and the thrushes
singing in the woods, "I told teacher I'm going to service on Monday;
and she says I may take little Elsie into the woods to-morrow; and
she'll give us dinner to eat there; for me as well as her, mother;
because she says I've always been a good boy at school, and she's sorry
to lose me."

"I'm glad she's sorry to lose thee," said Ruth; "and if thee weren't to
sleep at home every night, I hardly know what I could do without thee,
Ishmael. I almost wish thee were a tiny little lad once again."

"When I'm a man," he answered eagerly, "you shan't ever go out working
in the fields, or tire yourself, mother. We'll never, never leave here,
because there's no place like it; but get the master to let me build a
better house that 'll keep you warm and dry, and we'll live together
till we die: won't we, mother?"

"Please God!" she said softly, with a smile on her brown face, as she
thought how much earlier she must die than the young lad, little more
than a child, who sat beside her.

"I should think it would please God," answered Ishmael, in a quiet
voice. "He doesn't want us to be always very poor, poorer than other
folks, mother?"

"Nay, I don't know," she replied; "His own Son was born in a stable,
and died upon the cross, with folks mocking at Him. I don't know what
thee and me have to go through, Ishmael. We can only say 'Please God!'"

It was late before Ishmael mounted the ladder to the close loft
overhead, and crept into his bed on the floor under the low thatch.
But it was after midnight when Ruth, with her wrinkled yet sinewy
arms, helped her drunken husband from one rung to another, fearful
every night lest her strength should fail her, and that he might fall,
crippled or lifeless, on the floor below.

"Thank God!" she always cried in the depth of her soul, when his
sluggish and leaden feet were safely planted on the floor above.



CHAPTER II.

IN THE WOODS.

THE village schoolmistress, Mrs. Cliff, knew Ruth well, for she had
employed her as her laundress from the time she had taken charge of
the school; and no linen could be sweeter and whiter than that which
Ruth washed, and dried in the sun on the gorse-bushes growing about
the old lime-kiln. Ishmael had been one of the most constant and
least troublesome of her scholars; and she was willing to mark her
approbation of him by entrusting her little girl to his care for a long
day in the Lime-kiln Woods.

The spring had come slowly on during May, and though it was already
June the trees were not yet in full leaf. The delicate network of
boughs overhead still kept many an open space for the sunshine to
stream through; and the half-transparent leaves glistened with a green
light. There was no thick tangle of burdock and thistle at present to
catch their feet and hinder them as they strolled along under the hazel
bushes. Here and there patches of bluebells covered the dusky earth;
and in a few rare spots, known to Ishmael, white lilies of the valley
were growing amid their broad green leaves. No very tall or massive
forest trees grew in the thin soil; but now and then an elm or an oak,
somewhat stunted, spread out its crooked branches; and there were
clumps of larches, tall and thin, growing in close companionship, with
their pointed tops piercing the sky.

And what a sky it was! A deeper blue than the bluebells under the
hazels, with little clouds scattered over it whiter than the lilies,
some of gleaming brightness, and others of a pearly grey, floating
lazily along before the soft fresh westerly wind. Ishmael felt a pride
in it all, as if the woods, and the flowers, and the sky belonged to
himself.

"Sit down and listen, Elsie," he said, throwing himself under an elm
tree, and holding his breath for very pleasure, as he strained his ear
to catch the different notes of the birds, singing in these early hours
of the sunny day.

There was the merry whistle of the starling—did Elsie hear that?—and
the deep, soft cooing of the wood-pigeons from their great clumsy
nests in the fir trees; and the harsh cry of the jay, as he flitted
across the open space between some trees, displaying his bright blue
wing-feathers. Oftener than any other note, except the chirp of the
sparrows, came the deep, grave caw of the rooks, as they sailed by
high in the air. Or was not the clear merry song of the thrushes and
blackbirds in the bushes all about them the most frequent sound of them
all?

But Ishmael knew also the note of the kingfisher and the woodpecker,
and the plaintive cry of the lapwing, and the call of the little
moor-lion in the swampy ground, overgrown with water weeds and tall
bulrushes. Every sound, loud and low, of the busy woodlands was known
to him; but they had never been so sweet to him as now, when, for the
first time, he had a companion gazing admiringly into his face as he
displayed his knowledge. Elsie was far before him in school; but here
she sat with wide-open wondering eyes, drinking in every word he spoke.

[Illustration]

"Oh, Ishmael!" she exclaimed, with a sigh of happiness and admiration,
"I should think nobody in the world knows as much as you!"

Never before had Ishmael had such words spoken to him, and he felt
almost dizzy. He began to think what other wonders he could show or
tell to her. Yes, there were more wonderful things to disclose to her
admiring eyes. The woods were beautiful; but he knew what was hidden
underground as well as what lay open to the eye of day. For underneath
their feet the earth was honeycombed with long, deserted galleries,
and roadways, and tunnels, where ages ago the limestone had been dug,
and brought to the surface by level shafts opening on the hill slopes.
Far away from the light of the sun, these subterranean paths ran in
many windings and twistings. Even on the surface there were indications
of them in basin-like hollows of varying depths and sizes, where the
treacherous ground had sunk in.

Some of these hollows were filled with water, forming little pools,
which glistened up to the sun, while others were dry basins green with
turf and coltsfoot, amongst which wild strawberries grew. Ishmael and
Elsie had busily gathered the small red fruit, and strung it upon long
bents of grass, to keep it as a dessert to the dinner they were going
to eat in the woods. Ishmael hastily formed a surprise for Elsie. When
the right minute came, when she was tired and hungry, and the sun beat
hotly upon them, he would take her to the cool shelter of a cave near
at hand, where he could show to her the entrance into the old limestone
quarry.

They came at length to a broad open glade, stretching far away between
two rows of trees, which was the famous spot for shooting-bouts in the
autumn, when the squire's visitors spent whole days in sport. Here in
the long, untrodden grass lay the old cartridge-cases thrown hastily
away last year. Ishmael told Elsie how the cracking of the guns rang
all day long, and how the smell of the gunpowder and its thick smoke
tainted the sweet air; and how, at night, when all was over, there
seemed a sorrowful silence in the wood, as if its timorous inhabitants
had been scared into utter terror.

"And the rabbits keep in their burrows," said Ishmael, "and don't come
out to play after sunset, like they do other nights, ay, by hundreds
and thousands, running after one another, and tumbling about like us
on the green, when we've a holiday; and you can see their little white
pads tossing about in the dusk. If you sit very still they'll come
a'most to your feet. And the bats fly about, and the cockchafers, and
big white owls, that make no noise when they fly. I'll show you our big
owl at home before you go home to-night."

They were sauntering along the glade slowly, when suddenly, from
under their very feet, as it seemed to Elsie, there sprang up, with a
loud whirr and a great fluttering of wings, a pheasant which had been
sitting close on her nest among the long grass, till their feet nearly
touched her. Elsie uttered a little scream of fright; but Ishmael went
down on his knees in a moment, parting the tangled grass which hid the
nest. There lay a cluster of brown eggs, ten of them, packed closely
together, and warm with the brooding-heat of the mother-hen.

"Oh!" cried Elsie, eagerly. "Can't we have some of them for dinner?
Only we can't cook them, you know, without a fire and a saucepan."

"Ay, but we can!" answered Ishmael, proud of doing what seemed
impossible to his companion. "We can make a fire, and roast 'em in the
ashes. We won't take more than four, two apiece; and I can tell which
are the newest laid. See, I've got a match in my pocket, and we'll pick
some sticks, and light a fire in a place I know of, where nobody can
ever find us."

Gathering up the sticks as they went along, he led Elsie to his cave.
It was situated about half-way down a steep slope which was overgrown
with hazel bushes and brambles. The low archway of the entrance was
little more than a yard high, and was quite concealed by the brushwood.
Within, the roof rose to a good height, and the floor of limestone was
dry, forming altogether a pleasant retreat, large enough to hold from
twenty to thirty persons. A green twilight reached them through the
closely-interwoven network of underwood; and a delicious coolness made
it the pleasantest place possible now the sun was so high in the blue
sky.

"Look, Elsie," said Ishmael, leading her to the back of the cave, where
a small hole, not unlike a large rabbit-burrow, led darkly into some
space beyond, "I've crawled through there many a time; and if it wasn't
for your frock, we'd go now—you and me. Oh, it goes for miles and miles
under the wood; and sometimes there's a little bit o' light coming
through cracks in the ground; and there are pools all black and still,
with just a tiny sparkle on them to show where they are; and there are
glistening stones hanging down from the roof, and drops o' water always
falling, falling from them. Oh, I wish you were a boy, and could creep
in along with me!"

"Oh, couldn't I?" cried Elsie.

"No, it 'ud never do,"' he said, decisively. "Never mind; I'll light
the fire now, and we'll have our dinner."

The fire was quickly kindled, and after it had died down a little, the
four eggs were covered over with hot embers, and left to roast. Ishmael
had brought a can of sparkling water from a little spring trickling
down the rock, whilst Elsie had laid out their dinner. Now she was
sitting beside it on a big stone, with her hands lying idly on her lap
in simple enjoyment, and her blue eyes gazing out happily on the waving
branches outside, whose shadows flickered up to her feet in a constant
dance.

"Oh, Ishmael," she cried, "I must say the song mother taught me about
'That's the way for Billy and me.' It seems as if it was made for us:
and I'll say them while the eggs are roasting.

   "Where the pools are bright and deep,
    Where the grey trout lies asleep,
    Up the river and over the lea,
    That's the way for Billy and me.

   "Where the blackbird sings the latest,
    Where the hawthorn blooms the sweetest,
    Where the nestlings chirp and flee,
    That's the way for Billy and me.

   "Where the mowers mow the cleanest,
    Where the hay lies thickest and greenest,
    There to trace the homeward bee,
    That's the way for Billy and me.

   "Where the hazel-bank is steepest,
    Where the shadow falls the deepest,
    Where the clustering nuts fall free.
    That's the way for Billy and me.

   "Why the boys should drive away
    Little maidens in their play,
    Or love to banter and fight so well
    That's a thing I never could tell.

   "But this I know, I love to play
    Through the meadow, among the hay,
    Up the water, and over the lea,
    That's the way for Billy and me." ¹

   ¹ This lovely little song is by James Hogg, the Ettrick Shepherd,
and is not as well-known as it deserves to be.

But Elsie had scarcely finished the last line when she saw the branches
before her slowly parted, and a man's head bent down, and looking into
their cave. It was a brown, sunburnt, rugged face: she knew it well
enough, but she had never liked it, and at this moment it filled her
with vague terror. Ishmael was kneeling by the red and smouldering
fire, and touching the eggs with the tips of his fingers. So absorbed
was he that he did not notice the darkening of the green twilight as
the gamekeeper came stooping under the archway; and he laughed a low,
quiet laugh of delight as he took one of the eggs from its hot bed.

"That one's done, Elsie!" he exclaimed, gaily.

"What's done?" asked Nutkin's harsh voice close beside him. "I saw the
smoke from your fire, you young rascal, and I came to see what mischief
you're up to. What, pheasant's eggs! Pheasant's eggs! Would nothing
else serve you for your dinner?"

Ishmael knelt, unable to stir, and gazing up aghast into the
gamekeeper's angry, yet triumphant face. What could he say? There were
the eggs in the ashes between them; he could not even drop the one he
was holding in his outstretched hand. He felt as if he could neither
move nor speak. He had no right to those eggs; they were stolen; but he
had not thought of that when Elsie had uttered her childish wish.

"I suppose you know," said Nutkin, very slowly, as if he meant every
word to strike home, "that I shall take you to gaol for this?"

"Oh, no, no!" cried Elsie, in an agony of fright. "We didn't know it
was any harm, did we, Ishmael? The eggs were on the ground, and we
might have trodden on them. Don't send us to gaol!"

"It's not you, only this young scoundrel," continued Nutkin; "you may
have to go before the justices, but it's him as 'll go to gaol for
poaching and stealing. I've told the squire scores of times, and now
he'll believe me. Get up, you rascal, and come along with me."

Suddenly Ishmael broke into a loud and bitter cry, which rang through
the cave, and seemed to be muttered back again from the old quarry.

"Oh, what will mother say when she hears of it?" he cried.

"And what will father say?" jeered the gamekeeper. "And brother
Humphrey? We'll take care you don't grow up a drunkard, and a disgrace
to the parish, like them, my fine fellow. Come along! Elsie, you run
home to your mother, and tell her to be more careful who you keep
company with another time. The squire 'll believe me now."

So saying, he dragged Ishmael out of the cave, and taking a strong
rope from his pocket, he knotted it into a sort of handcuff, by which
he bound the lad fast to him. Elsie followed them, sobbing, to the
white dusty road leading to Uptown, where there was a police-station;
and then sadly watching them out of sight, she went home, almost
heartbroken, to her mother.



CHAPTER III.

SATURDAY AND SUNDAY.

RUTH had been hard at work all day hoeing thistles. Many a time she
lifted up her eyes to the green woods where Ishmael and Elsie were at
play, and recalled the rare days of holiday like it which she had had
when she was young. The thought of the children's pleasure made her own
work lighter; and though she was tired enough when she heard the church
clock strike the hour for leaving the field, she walked along briskly
under the hedge, to be home the sooner. Elsie and Ishmael would be
fine and hungry before she could get tea ready; and Mrs. Chipchase had
promised her some buttermilk, to make them some buttermilk pikelets for
a treat.

There was a pleasant stir and agitation in Ruth's mind, yet there was
a vague disquiet mingled with the pleasure. Ishmael was about to cease
to be a child, and was stepping into the perils and duties of boyhood,
that dangerous crisis in which she had seemed to lose all her other
children. He was about to escape from under her wing and flutter away;
like these little half-fledged hedge-sparrows, which were twittering
and hovering all along the thorn-bushes. Her other boys and girls
seemed to care no more for their poor home than the nestlings of this
year will care for the old nest next spring. But Ishmael was not like
the others, who had all taken after their father, and only thought of
their mother as a drudge to slave for them.

She had not been as good a mother to them, she said to herself; but
then she had not believed in God as she did now. How marvellously good
He had been to her to give her such a son as Ishmael, when she was a
weary, worn-down, grey-haired woman!

Mrs. Chipchase nearly filled Ruth's large brown pitcher with
buttermilk, and gave her two or three spoonfuls of tea in a screw of
paper. Ruth was a favourite with her, as being a quiet, harmless old
woman, and she lingered a moment at the door to speak a word or two to
her.

"Mind Ishmael's here in time of a morning," she said, "for the master's
very particular."

"I'm sure," answered Ruth falteringly, "as I don't know how to thank
you and the master for taking him. It 'll be the makin' of him, I know;
and he's a good lad, ma'am, God bless him!"

It was seldom Ruth uttered so many words together, except to Ishmael;
but her heart was full.

The farmhouse was a homely place, but there was a rude abundance about
it, which she seemed to feel for the first time, as if she also had a
share in it. She stood at the kitchen door, and could see the big table
at which Ishmael would eat, where a plough-boy was now sitting, deeply
absorbed in the contents of a huge basin, which had been filled up from
a big iron pot hanging a little way above the fire. The smell of the
good broth reached her, and seemed to promise that Ishmael would grow a
strong, hale man, when he could always satisfy his hunger.

"'He hath satisfied the hungry with good things,'" she murmured to
herself, as she took up her brown pitcher, and with a curtsey to the
mistress turned to go away.

"Ruth Medway!" shouted a loud, rough voice from the far end of the
farmyard, "Nutkin the keeper's been and hauled Ishmael to gaol for
stealing pheasant's eggs in the wood!"

"There's the master come home!" cried Mrs. Chipchase. "Whatever is he
shouting, Ruth?"

Ruth was still standing with a smile on her wrinkled face; but it died
away as the meaning of the words reached her brain. The sky grow black,
and the sunshine fled away; a dizziness seized her, which made the
solid ground she stood on reel beneath her. The loud crashing of her
brown pitcher, as it slipped from her hand, and broke into a hundred
fragments on the stone causeway, brought her back to her senses.

"What's the matter?" asked Mrs. Chipchase, running to the door, which
her husband had now reached.

"Matter enough!" he answered. "Here's our new waggoner's lad, that
was to come on Monday morning, taken off to gaol for poaching. Nutkin
caught Ishmael and Elsie roasting eggs in the wood; pheasant's eggs,
stolen from the nest! There's no chance of him getting off! For the
squire's mad after game; and Nutkin swears he'll lock him up out of
harm's way. I'm sorry for you, Ruth, to have such a husband and family.
I did think Ishmael was going to be a comfort to you in your old age.
But the lad knew better; and he's no excuse."

"It was naught but a lad's trick," said Mrs. Chipchase, "such as any
one 'ud do. Ishmael never stole an egg of mine, when I set him to
gather them. Our own boys never brought in more than he did. He's as
honest as the day, I'm sure."

"Thank you kindly, ma'am," murmured Ruth, turning away and walking
slowly down the causeway towards home, with a bowed head and feeble
feet.

How heavily her sixty years seemed to weigh upon her all at once! How
rough the road was, which she had trodden so many hundreds of times
in all kinds of weather, to earn her own bread and Ishmael's! Was she
half-blind, that everything looked so dim?

And where had all the merry sounds of the summer evening gone to?
There was a sort of numbness and stupor over her mind, until she found
herself trying to fit the old key into the lock of her poor hut, the
home Ishmael had never yet left for a single night. He was not coming
home to-night!

She sunk down on the door-sill, and swayed herself to and fro in mute
despair. No tears came to her eyes; for she was old and her tears were
exhausted; but she sobbed heavily again and again, and yet again. There
was no hope in her heart. She thought of Nutkin's enmity, and her
husband's bad character. The Rector's family had gone away to foreign
parts for six months, and a stranger, who knew nothing of Ishmael, was
taking the duty of the parish. The squire could not be reached, for
Nutkin's influence was all-powerful with him. No, there was no chance
for Ishmael.

To be in prison! Home was poor enough; she felt all at once what a
dark, miserable, empty hovel it was. But if Ishmael could only be
within, it would be a true home to both of them. She sat down on the
desolate hearth, and tried to think of God; but she could think of no
one but Ishmael yet. Her soul was in the deepest depths.

All night long she lay awake. The little bed on the floor beside
her was empty for the first time; and her ear listened in vain for
Ishmael's quiet breathing. Her husband had come home so drunk that she
had not dared to get him up the ladder, and he was lying in a dead
sleep on the floor below. Over and over again she counted her nine
children on her fingers, some dead and some living, and a heavy sob
broke from her lips as she whispered "Ishmael."

She had mourned over her dead, and grieved over her living children who
had forsaken her; but no sorrow had been like this sorrow. None of them
had ever been in prison, and now it was her youngest and dearest, yes,
and her best, who was fallen into deep disgrace.

When the morning came her heart turned sick at the thought of going to
church, and Humphrey with an oath forbade her to go to Uptown after
Ishmael. Ishmael would not be in the singing gallery: and how could she
sing, "Glory be to the Father" while he was in prison?

All the morning Humphrey, sitting by the wood-fire, to make sure that
Ruth obeyed him, was cursing Ishmael as a disgrace; but she did not
answer a word. She had kept silence so long that she hardly knew how
to talk, except to Ishmael. It was a relief to her when her husband
took himself off in the afternoon, and left her in solitude as well as
silence.

She was sitting alone, with her wrinkled face hidden in her hands,
deaf, blind, and mute to everything but her trouble, when she felt
the warm pressure of loving arms round her neck. For a moment she
thought it was Ishmael, but looking up she saw the face of Elsie. Her
mother was standing near, and when Ruth rose to drop a curtsey to the
schoolmistress, she took her hard cramped hand between both of her
own, and, bending forwards, kissed the old woman's brown cheek. Ruth's
face flushed a little, and a strange feeling of surprise and pleasure
flashed across the darkness of her grief.

"I want you to get a cup of tea for me," said Mrs. Clift.

It was something for Ruth to do; and, as she busied herself in kindling
her swift-burning fire, and filling her small tin kettle from the well,
for a few fleet moments she forgot Ishmael. But she could eat nothing
when the tea was ready, though Elsie had brought some dainty tea-cakes
in order to tempt her appetite.

"I have been up to the Hall, and seen Mr. Lansdowne," said Mrs. Clift,
as they sat together at the rough little table. "Elsie has to go before
the magistrates to-morrow at Uptown; and I went to speak for poor
Ishmael. But there's not much hope, Ruth. Mr. Lansdowne tells me Nutkin
says Ishmael has infested the woods since his very babyhood, and all
the village thinks him to be in league with poachers. That's not the
truth, I know."

Ruth shook her head in sorrowful denial.

"I told the squire so," said the schoolmistress, softly; "and he
answered women never could be made to believe that poaching was a
crime. I did say I couldn't call taking a few eggs from a wild bird's
nest any great sin—not bad enough for a young lad to be sent to gaol
for. He said it was not only that, but all the Medways were a plague
and a pest in the parish; and it would be a kindness to check Ishmael
at the outset. Ruth, I'm more grieved than I can tell you."

Again Ruth shook her grey head in silence.

"I've been thinking how lonely you are, and how you have to bear the
sins of your husband and sons," said Mrs. Clift; "and it seems to me
that to think of our Lord's life here is the only thing to comfort you.
Do you remember the words, 'He is despised and rejected of men; a Man
of sorrows, and acquainted with grief: and we hid as it were our faces
from Him; He was despised, and we esteemed Him not'?"

The quiet voice speaking so gently to her ceased for a few minutes;
and Ruth covered her troubled face again with her hands. It was the
Lord Jesus who had been despised and rejected of men, as she was by her
neighbours. He had been "a Man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief,"
more deeply than she was.

Did her old companions in the village hide as it were their faces from
her? Nay, all the world had hid their faces from Him who died to save
them. Even on the cross those that passed by reviled Him, wagging their
heads; and the chief priests and elders, and the thieves crucified with
Him had mocked and jeered at Him.

"'Surely He hath borne our griefs, and carried our sorrows,'" resumed
the quiet, gentle voice. "'He was wounded for our transgressions: the
chastisement of our peace was upon Him; and with His stripes we are
healed.'"

She was not bearing her griefs alone, then, as she had fancied during
the long dark night. The Lord Himself had carried her sorrows. He had
been wounded for her transgressions, and for Ishmael's. A healing sense
of His love and compassion and fellow-feeling was stealing over her
aching heart.

"'All we like sheep have gone astray,'" went on the soothing voice; "'
we have turned every one to his own way; and the Lord hath laid on Him
the iniquity of us all. He was oppressed, and He was afflicted, yet He
opened not His mouth: He is brought as a lamb to the slaughter, and as
a sheep before her shearers is dumb, so He openeth not His mouth.'"

Dumb, and opening not His mouth! Was not that again like herself? She
could not cry aloud, and speak many words, and make her grief known to
every ear. It was true. Jesus Christ had lived her life of sorrows, and
grief, and scorn, and silence. Her head was bowed down still, but her
heart was lifted up. The suffering Son of God made it easier for her to
bear her own suffering.

It was growing dusk now, and the schoolmistress bade her good night;
but Ruth would go a little way on the road with her. When she returned
to her lonely home, she lingered for a minute, trembling and reluctant
to re-enter its dark solitude.

It had always been her custom, since Ishmael was a baby in her arms,
to sing, "Glory to Thee, my God, this night," as the last thing before
he went to bed, except when Humphrey happened to be at home, which was
very seldom. She had not thought of it last night, the first time that
Ishmael had been away from her. But the thought crossed her mind, and
could not be driven away from it, that, may be, this Sunday evening he
was singing it alone in his cell at Uptown.

The tears, which had not come last night, stood in her dim eyes, as,
sitting down in her old chair by the dark hearth, she sang the hymn
right through, in a low and faltering voice, which could hardly have
been heard beyond the threshold.



CHAPTER IV.

THE MAGISTRATES' MEETING.

UPTOWN was not worthy of the name of town; it could hardly be called a
large village. But it was the centre of a wide agricultural district,
and a small market was held in it once a week, chiefly for the sale of
butter and eggs, as the farmers carried their corn to a more important
market farther away, in the county town. A magistrates' meeting was
held at Uptown at stated intervals; and there was a police-station just
outside the village, provided with two cells, but seldom occupied, in
one of which Ishmael had been safely kept since noonday on Saturday.

Heavy-hearted still, though with a fund of secret courage bearing her
up, Ruth entered Uptown on the Monday morning. There was more stir
than usual about the single street, as there always was on the days
when the magistrates came to hear the trivial cases which awaited
their judgment. Round the inn where the justices' room was, there
were several groups of somewhat discreditable folks hanging about in
readiness.

Nutkin was within the inn-yard, eagerly talking to one of the
magistrates who had arrived before the others, and had just dismounted
from his horse. Ruth saw him, but it was as if she did not see him, so
absorbed was her whole soul in watching for Ishmael to come along the
road between the town and the police-station. She was half unconscious
of the increasing crowd and stir, as the magistrates rode in one after
another; and the magistrates' clerk bustled down from his house with
his blue bag full of papers. Mrs. Clift had arrived too with Elsie; and
Squire Lansdowne was gone into the large room of the inn; but she only
half knew it.

At last Ishmael appeared, walking beside a policeman, who kept his hand
tightly on his collar, as if to remind him it was of no use to try to
escape. But could this sullen, scowling lad, with rough uncombed hair
and tear-stained face, be Ishmael? He was close beside her, yet he
never raised his eyes; and he would have passed her by, if she had not
cried out in a very lamentable voice, "Oh, Ishmael, Ishmael!"

[Illustration]

"It's my mother," he said, as the policeman tightened his grasp of his
collar. "Don't you come inside, mother dear. It 'ud do no good, and it
'ud make me cry. You go home again now you've seen me to say good-bye.
You'll loose me to kiss my mother?" he added, looking at the policeman.

"Ay, if you're sharp about it," he answered.

For a minute the young boy, scarcely more than a child, and the bent,
grey-haired woman stood with their arms fondly clinging about each
other. Ruth felt as if she could not let him go; it seemed but a few
days since he was but a baby in her bosom; and now he was a prisoner
charged with an offence against the laws of his country. But Ishmael
loosened his hands and let himself be led away inside the magistrates'
room.

Then she sat down on the lowest step of a horse-block below its
open window, through which she could hear the hum of voices coming
indistinctly to her ear. How long it was she did not know, but a
gaily-dressed, flaunting young woman came to her at length, and spoke
in a pitying tone.

"Don't you take on, Mrs. Medway," she said; "you're a good woman, I
know, but luck's agen you. Nutkin was very hard on him; and they've
give him three months in the county gaol."

"Is it my Ishmael?" she asked, looking up with a wandering and vacant
expression in her eyes.

"To be sure," answered the young woman. "'Ishmael Medway, thirteen
years of age; three months for stealing pheasant's eggs.'"

Ruth heard no more, saw nothing more. But bending forward, as if to
lift herself upon her feet, she fell heavily on the pavement, in a deep
swoon. There was a crowd clustering about her, when Ishmael was marched
out of the inn by the policeman; he looked round in vain for a last
glance at his mother's face.

"It were best for her to go away," he said to himself, with a sob; "but
I should ha' liked to ha' seen her again."

He felt as if he were going to die in the prison to which they were
sending him, and as if he should never see his mother's face again. His
young soul was in a bewilderment of grief and amazement. He had heard
himself described as an incorrigible thief and poacher. Everything
had gone against him: the notorious character of his father and elder
brothers; his own admission of having haunted the woods until he knew
every spot in them; even his tearful confession that he knew he had no
right to the eggs, and did not know why he should take them then for
the first time. All had been against him.

He was going away to gaol, a shame and disgrace to his poor mother.
To-day too; the very day he was to have begun to earn his own living,
and relieve her from the burden he had been upon her. He would be a
worse trouble to her than any of the others had been, even than his
father, who came home every night either drunk or angry. What could he
ever do to make it up to her now? He could do nothing better than to
die.

It was late before Ruth reached home in the evening, and she found her
husband awaiting her return, sober and sullen; a hard, tyrannical old
man, who looked upon her as a silent and spiritless drudge.

"So," he exclaimed, as she stepped feebly and weariedly over the
threshold, "this is what it's come to: thy fine lad's got hisself into
gaol! This comes o' book-learnin' and psalm-singin', eh? He brings
shame on all on us. Ne'er a one on us was iver up afore the justices
till now; and they say at the Labour in Vain as he's got three months.
And serve him right, I say. I takes sides with Nutkin, and th' squire,
and the justices, as are ivery one on 'em gentlemen. If I'd a bit o'
land, I'd hang every poacher as set foot on it. And a young little lad
o' his age! What 'll he be when he's a man? I'd ha' sent him to Botany
Bay, I would. I'm on the side o' justice. And if ever Ishmael crosses
o'er that door-sill agen, I'll thresh him to within an inch o' his
life! I'll break ivery bone in his body! And thine, too," he shouted,
with growing fury, "if thee don't open that cursed mouth o' thine, and
say somethink!"

"I'm ill, Humphrey," she answered, meekly; "I swoonded away dead when
they told me on it."

"Swoonded!" he repeated, sneeringly. "Don't tell me. It's only born
ladies as can do that, not a workin' woman like thee. But swound or no
swound, just hearken to my words. Ishmael niver sets his foot over yon
door-sill. I'll harbour no poachers or gaol-birds under my roof."

Very quietly Ruth went on lighting the fire and boiling the kettle.
It was a relief to her to be at home again, out of the stir and buzz
of the little town, and out of sight of inquisitive eyes. Even her
husband's threats and jeers could not altogether spoil the sense of
having found rest at her own fireside.

And when he was gone, the unbroken silence of the dark hut suited her.
Her harassed soul could recollect itself now. Even in dense darkness
our eyes, by eager gazing, begin to see a little, and so in the deepest
trouble the soul, by its earnest yearning towards God, begins to
discern light. As Ruth sat alone in the dark hut, there came back to
her memory the old story in the Bible, from which she had taken a name
for her youngest boy. She thought of Hagar in the wilderness, a runaway
slave, fleeing from her mistress, and how God heard her affliction; and
how once more she was driven into the wilderness, wandering up and down
homeless, until her son Ishmael was dying of thirst, and his mother
cast him under a shrub to die, and went away out of sight—a good way
off—lest she should see the death of her child; and how God heard the
voice of the lad, and once again sent His angel to succour Hagar.

Ruth shut her aching and swollen eyelids with a feeling of comfort and
awe, as she whispered, "'Thou God seest me.'"

Yes, God saw; God knew. There was unspeakable consolation in that.
She felt no bitterness of heart, even against Nutkin. She had nothing
to say against the law that had sent Ishmael to prison. She did not
try to justify her boy; he had done wrong, though in lightheartedness
and thoughtlessness, not in malice. None of these things occupied her
simple mind. God had seen all; and He knew all about it. It was in that
thought she was to find consolation and strength. She must endure, as
seeing Him who is invisible.



CHAPTER V.

TURNED ADRIFT.

THE hay-harvest and the corn-harvest, with their long hours of labour
in the sunshine, passed by; and Ruth was one of the busiest of the
women working on Chipchase's farm. No one saw much change in her,
for she had always been a silent, inoffensive woman, minding her own
business, and leaving other folks alone.

But when harvest was ended, and the shooting season begun, the
term of Ishmael's imprisonment was nearly over. Nutkin and his
assistant-keepers were very busy about the woods, watching them all
night, whilst all day long the crash of guns could be heard far and
near. It was not a good time for Ishmael to be coming home; there was
too much to put her husband in mind of his threats, and to keep his
anger hot against his son. But surely he could not be so hard as to
turn Ishmael out of doors when the law let him go free!

"Ishmael's time's up to-morrow," she said, in a tremulous voice one
evening, with a deep anxiety she was striving to conceal.

"Ay," answered Humphrey, slowly, "that's what Nutkin says. So I up to
the Hall this mornin' early, and I says to th' squire, 'Squire, I've
been a honest man all my life; and I've worked on your hedges many a
year; and I'm not a-goin' to harbour no poacher in my home. There's
that lad o' mine, that's been a disgrace to me, a-comin' out o' the
county gaol to-morrow. He'll niver set his foot o'er my door-sill, I
promise you.

"The squire says, 'As you choose, Humphrey. Go into the kitchen, and
get a draught o' ale.' And good ale it was; a sight better nor that at
the Labour in Vain. I'm not the man to drink the squire's good ale, and
go agen him in any way."

"Thou 'lt never turn the lad adrift on the world?" cried Ruth.

"Adrift! He's big enough to shift for himself," said Humphrey,
doggedly. "The squire could get us turned out o' here neck-and-crop if
he chosen; and what 'ud become of me, if we had to go to the workhouse?
The squire won't have no poacher harboured close to his woods: and
who's to save me from goin' into the house in my old age, eh? Me, as
can't live without my drop o' goad ale, often and regular. I tasted the
beer in the workhouse once. No; Ishmael niver sets his foot o'er that
door-sill agen! And now thou knows it, and can make the best on it."

Ruth had a sleepless night again, as if the first bitterness of her
sorrow had come back upon her with tenfold power. Early as the dawn
came the next morning, she was up before it, making a bundle of all
Ishmael's coarse clothing, the scanty outfit she had scraped together
for him three months ago, when he was going out to earn his own living.
Mrs. Chipchase was taking her butter to market in the county town, and
had offered to carry Ruth with her in the gig, that she might meet
Ishmael at the gate-of the county gaol.

[Illustration]

She saw little enough of the dusty high road along which they drove,
or of the bustling streets thronged with a concourse of market people.
It was only when she came within sight of the gaol that she seemed to
wake up from a brown study and get her wits about her again. It stood
outside the town, amid green fields; a large square ugly building,
surrounded by strong and black stone walls. Small round windows,
closely barred and grated, looked out like hoodwinked eyes over the
lonely fields.

Ruth felt herself shivering, though the September sun was shining in an
unclouded sky, as she looked up, and wondered which one of those gloomy
windows had lighted Ishmael's cell. But before she could reach the
heavy gate, she saw sauntering down the path from the gaol, creeping
with sluggish footsteps and a bowed down head, her boy, Ishmael himself.

"Mother," he cried, "mother!"

He threw himself into her arms, laughing and crying at the same moment.

Ruth could not weep; but she held him fast in her arms, until he lifted
up his head to look into her dear face. There was no one near to see
them; they were as much alone as in their own quiet woods; only that
grim and ugly building looked down upon their meeting with its hollow
eyes.

She drew him away to a lonely spot under its walls; and they sat down
together on the grass, whilst, with her trembling hands, she untied the
little packet of home-made bread, baked in their own oven, which she
had brought for them to eat together, before they had to part again.

"I never meant any harm, mother," he said, when their meal was over. "I
never thought of anything save little Elide wishing for 'em. But I know
it was poaching; and oh, mother, it 'll turn up against me all my life."

"I'm afeared so, lad," she answered, sighing. "But hast thee asked
God's forgiveness, Ishmael?"

"Often and often," he replied, eagerly. "Mother, I never forgot to
sing, 'Glory to Thee, my God, this night;' only I sang it low, in a
whisper; like I used to do when father was at home. I thought you'd be
singing it as well, mother."

"Ay," she said, softly; "thank God I could sing it after the first
evenin', Ishmael."

"When I get home," he went on, "I'll go up to the Hall and ask the
squire to forgive me; I'll beg and pray of him; and if he will, maybe I
can go to work with Mr. Chipchase, like I was to go before I came here."

"He's got another waggoner's boy," answered his mother; "and thee 'rt
not to go home with me, but do thy best away from home. Father won't
hear of it; and maybe the squire 'ud get us turned out altogether if
thee comes home. But if God has forgiven thee—"

"Not go home with you, mother?" he cried.

"No," she said, half sobbing, "no! But God sees; God knows. Jesus
Christ had not where to lay His head, and had to wander about without a
home. Ishmael, I want thee to believe that God sees us always; and He
loves us, in spite of it seeming as if He didn't take any notice of us.
Oh, if I thought God didn't know and didn't care, my heart 'ud break.
I'd go down to the river, yonder, and just drown myself. But some day
He'll find us a home again, thee and me."

She had never spoken so passionately before, even to him; and he was
startled, gazing into her agitated face with wondering eyes. Then he
looked back at the dreary gaol, his last dwelling-place. There seemed
to be no place for him in the whole world now he had been in there.

"Where can we find a home again, mother?" he asked at last. "There's no
place like home."

"Up there!" she said, lifting her dim eyes to the great sky above them.
"If God gives us no other home here in this world, He's got one ready
there for thee and me. 'Let not your heart be troubled: ye believe in
God, believe also in Me. In My Father's house are many mansions; I go
to prepare a place for you. That's what Jesus said. He's preparing a
place for us, Ishmael; and we must not trouble our hearts too much.
Only we must go on believing in Him."

"I'll try, mother," he said, putting his hand in hers.

And they sat there, not speaking much, but with hands closely clasped,
till the chiming of the church clocks in the town behind them reminded
Ruth there was still something to be done. A place must be found for
Ishmael to sleep in that night, and if possible to stay at till he
could get work to do.

It was hard work leaving him, so far away from her, to loiter about the
streets and pick up any stray job that might fall in the way of a boy
with a doubtful character. Her mother's heart told her but too plainly
how precarious such a life must be. Only a few months ago, he was still
a child; even yet, in happier homes he would be reckoned among the
children, to be punished, indeed, for his faults, but not to be thrust
into want and temptation.

But Ishmael was to fight in the thickest of the battle, bereft of his
good name, and removed from all good companionship. Yet Ruth had hope
and faith. She worked harder than ever, never taking a day's rest, that
she might save a few pence every week to send to his help. She knew he
was almost always hungry; often pinched with cold; ragged and nearly
barefoot at all times; scarcely able to pay for a shelter night after
night. He roamed about the country from farmstead to farmstead, doing
any odd work the farmers would trust him with, and sleeping in any
outhouse or broken shed he could find open. But he failed in getting a
settled place; there were too many boys of good character who wanted to
set their foot on the first step of the ladder.

There was one thing he could not make up his mind to do. He could not
put such a distance between himself and his mother as would prevent
him seeing her every Sunday. He never failed to steal homewards at the
close of the week, lurking about the lime-kiln or the woods, in hiding
from his father, until he could make his presence known to his mother.
It was the great solace and enjoyment of her life.

She could still wash and mend his clothes for him, and get him a
sufficient meal or two, and listen to all that had happened to him
during the week. He never crossed the threshold of his old home; but on
summer evenings, Ruth and he sat together within the tangle of green
brushwood behind it, and on winter nights, they sheltered themselves
under the walls of the old kiln, or, if they needed a roof over their
heads, they met in the limestone cave, which most often of all was
Ishmael's sleeping-place.



CHAPTER VI.

FIVE YEARS.

SO five years went on, and still Ishmael was not a man. There was
little hope now of his even making a strong, hardy, capable man. The
privations he was compelled to undergo had told upon his undersized,
thin, and feeble frame. But still more had the anxieties and the
mortifications he had to endure borne down his spirit.

No one but his mother cared for him. Suspicion dogged him, and the
doubtful companions necessity forced upon him strengthened suspicion.
He was losing heart, and growing hopeless. His mother had called him
Ishmael, because the Lord had heard her affliction; but she might have
called him Ishmael because every man's hand was against him. Would the
day come, dreaded by his mother, when his hand would be against every
man?

The last few years had weighed more heavily upon Ruth than ten might
have done if Ishmael had been at home. She could no longer help her old
husband up the ladder when he came home drunk; and many a night he had
lain on the damp floor, groaning with rheumatic pains, for want of a
strong young arm such as Ishmael's would have been. Still every Sunday
brought her a gleam of gladness. As yet Ishmael had not gone astray
amid his manifold temptations; and she was comforted for her own sorrow
and his. But what would become of him when she was no longer there?

It was a hard trial to her, when she heard Ishmael's call, plaintive
and low, sounding round and round the hut through the stillness of a
winter's night, and she could not answer it. It would come nearer and
nearer, until it seemed as if it were under the very eaves; but if her
husband was crouching over the fire, she dared not even open the door
to look out. In the black darkness outside the little casement, she
could see for a moment the dim outline of her boy's white face gazing
through the lattice-panes; and then the long, low, plaintive cry grew
fainter, and died away in the woods behind.

"I must tell Nutkin of that owl," said old Humphrey, peevishly.

At last Ruth could go out no more to her hard work, but lay still and
almost helpless in her close loft, scarcely able to creep down the
ladder to the hearth below.

Old Humphrey could not understand that she was no longer the willing
drudge she had been so long. That she should get free from him by death
never once crossed his dull brain, soddened by drink. Many a moan he
made over his wife's idleness in the sanded kitchen of the Labour in
Vain, where he sat now on a corner of a bench farthest from the fire,
having only a few pence to spend; he who in better days had been
welcome to the best seat, and been most lavish with his money.

But whenever Sunday came, new life seemed to visit Ruth. Whence the
strength arose she could not tell; but it never failed her when she got
up from her bed, and crept downstairs, and out into the spring sunshine
to meet Ishmael. Everybody knew now, except Humphrey, that Ishmael
haunted the old home where his mother was dying, but they took no
notice except by carrying food, as they said, for old Ruth, though they
knew well she could not eat it. Some of the women offered to do any
washing they could for her, and made no remark when Ishmael's clothing
was among it.

For when we are going down visibly into the dark valley of the shadow
of death, those around us look upon us with other eyes, and press upon
us some of the kindliness and tenderness which would have made all the
pilgrimage of life only a happy journey. Ruth, so long a solitary and
sorrowful woman, wondered at the friendliness which gathered about her
in her last days.

"It makes home seem sweeter," she said to Ishmael, "to have plenty o'
friends, and plenty o' everything else. But if it had always been so, I
might never ha' thought as dyin' was like goin' home. I always think as
if heaven were home now, Ishmael," she added, a faint smile lighting up
her wrinkled face.

She was sitting beside him on the old door-sill for the last time,
though that they did not know. For when death is drawing near to any
one of us, we do not always know that the last time is come for the old
familiar duties and habits of every-day life. It had been a long sunny
day in May, but now the twilight was coming on, and every minute made
her beloved face more thin and shadowy.

"It feels a'most," she went on falteringly, "like when I was a little
girl, and 'ud hear father callin' me in from my play. I'm partly
afeared to say it, Ishmael; but it's sometimes as if I could hear the
blessed Lord callin', 'Ruth, come to Me, and ye shall find rest.'

"And last night I answered Him out loud, 'Lord, I can't rest because of
my lad Ishmael.'

"And it seemed to me as if there came a low quiet voice whispering to
me, 'Leave Ishmael to Me. He is My son.'

"And I said to myself, 'The Lord has heard my affliction again.'"

Ishmael sat silent, with his eyes fastened on the pale yellow light in
the sky behind the tops of the trees, across which a bat was flitting
to and fro; but he did not see the sunset light or the flight of the
bat.

"Ay!" she said, almost joyously. "And to-day I knew He'd heard; for
Mrs. Clift and Miss Elsie came to see me; and Ishmael, my lad, they
brought grand news for thee. They're going away across the seas, to
that country where folks go for a better chance than they've got here;
and they've promised to take thee with them; for Mrs. Clift said, 'It
was all along of Elsie that Ishmael got into trouble and disgrace; and
folks won't think badly of him there; and I'll be like a mother to
him,' said Mrs. Clift. And I knew then that God had heard my affliction
again."

"Oh, mother!" cried Ishmael, "I couldn't leave thee, never; not if the
Queen of England sent for me to go!"

"But oh, my lad," she answered, "if the Lord doesn't take me home afore
the time comes for thee to go, thee must leave me. Ay, and I should die
happier, knowin' thee were safe away, and havin' a chance to be a good
man, than leavin' thee here to be tempted and drove into sin. Ishmael,
promise me thee 'll go, whether I'm alive or dead, when the time comes.
Oh, my dear, dear lad, promise to obey me!"

"I cannot, mother, I cannot!" he sobbed. "I'll go gladly if thee are
dead; but so long as thee can speak to me, and I can look at thee, I
cannot go."

"They're not goin' afore hay-harvest," she said softly; "and, please
God, I may be dead by then."

But as she lay awake at night, thinking of Ishmael, who was sleeping
soundly in his old shelter, the cave in the limestone rock, she
wondered what would become of him if she could not prevail upon him to
leave her for ever, whilst she was still living. There would be no one
who loved her to close her dying eyes, and hold her dying hand, and
whisper last words of love into her dying ear, if Ishmael were gone.
But, oh, how gladly would she rather die in utter loneliness if she
knew that he was safe, and would have a new start in life!

The days passed slowly away; and the grass grew in the fields around,
and blossomed, and ripened for the scythe: but still life seemed to
cling to Ruth, weary as she was to die and set Ishmael free. She could
no longer come down the ladder which led to the loft, where she lay in
darkness; but whenever Humphrey was away, Ishmael was beside her in
the darkness, within reach of her hand, as in the old time when he was
a child. There was no stint of food for him now, for Mrs. Clift came
every day with Elsie, and Mrs. Chipchase sent from the farm, or called
in to see Ruth herself, and neither of them came empty-handed. It was
only when the time came each day for him to escape out of the way of
his father that he felt himself still an exile from his home.

"I'll not leave thee to-night," he said, one evening when she seemed
worse than he had ever seen her before; "I can't leave thee to-night.
Maybe thou 'rt dyin'."

"Nay," she answered with a long, low, sad sigh, "nay, Ishmael, there
mustn't be a fight 'twixt thy father and thee over my dyin' bed."

"He'll come home drunk," he said almost fiercely; "and I can't leave
thee alone with him."

"I'm not afeared to be left alone with thy father," she replied. "He
was a good husband to me once, and he'll not be hard with me when I'm
dyin'. I wasn't always as good a wife as I might ha' been: and I've
a many things to say to him. Hark! They're running to tell thee he's
comin' up the lane. Go, Ishmael; kiss me, and go quickly."

"I cannot go!" he cried; clinging to her. "P'r'aps I shall never see
thy face again, never! Oh, mother, I cannot go!"

But as he still held her in his arms, and she pushed him feebly away,
Elsie's clear young voice was heard in the kitchen below, calling
hurriedly.

"Ishmael," she cried, "little Willie Nutkin is lost in the old
quarry behind the cave, and we want you. Nutkin, and the squire, and
everybody; we all want you."



CHAPTER VII.

HER LAST COMMAND.

ISHMAEL loosed his hold of his mother, but he did not rise from the
place where he was kneeling beside her. A faint gleam coming up
from the room below lit up Ruth's face as she looked earnestly and
searchingly into his.

"I can't quit my mother," he answered, speaking in a loud but forced
tone; "she's dyin', and if I go, maybe I shall never see her again."

"Ishmael," said Ruth, "thee has never forgiven Nutkin yet."

"No," he muttered, "no; it's been too much to forgive. He drove me
away from home; and I'd have been a man by now, instead of a wastrel,
if he hadn't been hard on me. Thee 'd not ha' worked thyself to death,
mother, if it hadn't been for him. No; I've not forgiven him. Let him
find his little lad for himself!"

"You must come, Ishmael," called Elsie. "Willie's been missing five
hours or more; and we can hear him crying in the old quarry; and nobody
knows it like you do; and the opening's too small for a man to crawl
through, and it's no use sending in a boy, if any of them would go
alone. Oh, come quickly! Suppose he strayed into one of those pools you
told me of and was drowned. Come down this minute!"

But Ishmael did not move; holding his mother's hand between his own,
and gazing mournfully into her beseeching face.

"If I bid thee go," she murmured, "thee would not disobey me now I'm
dyin'?"

"Don't send me," he cried; "don't bid me go!"

"Nay," she said tenderly, "I'm bound to bid thee, and thee art bound to
go. It 'ud be no comfort to see thee nigh me, if I couldn't die happy
for thinkin' o' the little lad in the pit. And it's partly because thee
hasn't forgiven Nutkin. And if we forgive not men their sins, neither
will our Heavenly Father forgive ours. That's what the blessed Lord
says. And oh, if thee forgives him, the Lord will forgive thee. Go,
Ishmael; I shall see thee again—not here, maybe—but in some better
place."

"I'll go," he said, looking into her face very sorrowfully; "but, oh,
if I never see thee again in this world, it 'll seem hard to wait till
we get to heaven."

Still Elsie's impatient and entreating voice reached their ears, urging
him to make haste, and his mother's sunken eyes were fastened upon
him with a look in them as if she was beseeching him to go. It might
be the last time he would ever see her face. With a deep and heavy
sigh, Ishmael stooped to kiss her, and, as if afraid to trust himself
to linger another moment, he sprang down the ladder, and, pushing on
through bramble and brushwood, quickly reached the entrance of the cave.

It was no longer dark and solitary. Many of the villagers were there,
and the glimmer of several lanterns produced a lurid and fitful light.
Nutkin knelt at the far end of the cave before the low and narrow
inlet, through which, when there was a moment's silence, he fancied he
could hear in the black darkness the voice of his child crying.

"The men will be here with pickaxes soon, Nutkin," said the squire, who
stood beside him, "and we'll get the little fellow out in a very short
time, my man."

"I'm more afeard of the picks bringing the old roof in than aught else,
sir," answered Nutkin, in a voice of despair; "there's been a deal o'
heavy rain o' late, and there's been two or three hollows given in
above ground; and if the roof gave way betwixt us and the little lad
he'd die o' fright before we could dig him out. If the hole was but
big enough for a man to creep through! But nobody could creep through
a hole no bigger than a rabbit-bury; only a teeny creature like little
Willie."

A profound silence followed Nutkin's speech, for no man or woman
there could risk the life of any of their boys by sending them into
the workings of the old quarry. And amid the silence there was heard
plainly enough a low stifled voice speaking.

"I can crawl through," it said; "I know every step o' the old pit."

"Ishmael Medway!" shouted half a dozen voices, joyously. "He's the lad,
if there is one."

He felt himself pushed forward to the far end of the cave, where the
light was strongest. The thin, stunted, undersized lad, in his tattered
clothing, and with his mournful face, stood in front of the squire, and
of his old enemy, who gazed at him half in shame and half in hope.

"Mother's sent me," he said, touching his old ragged cap to the squire.
"She's dyin', and I don't s'pose as I shall ever see her again; but
she couldn't die happy with the little lad lost in the pit. And mother
says if I forgive him here, God 'll forgive me, and take me, some day,
somewhere, to the place where she's goin'! I slept here last night, and
I heard the ground give way. Don't set any picks at work."

Ishmael did not wait for an answer, but lying down on the ground,
crept through the narrow, winding tunnel he had often crawled through
as a boy. He called back to them when he had reached the shaft, where
he could stand upright, and they saw that he had struck a light; but
presently all sound and sign of him was lost, and Nutkin and the squire
rose from their knees where they had been watching and listening, and
the fitful light of the lanterns shone upon the tears in their eyes.

"I'll make a man of that lad," said the squire, in a broken voice.

"God Almighty bring him and Willie safe back," cried Nutkin, sinking
down on his knees again, "and I'll treat him as my own son, I will; as
long as ever I live! So help me, God!"

So silent for some time was the crowd of villagers now thronging the
cave, that they could hear the heavy splashes of water falling from
the rain-sodden earth into the little pools collected below in the
subterranean alleys of the old pit; and once a low rumbling like
distant thunder, telling of the earth giving way in one of the many
galleries, made them hold their breath in speechless dread, and look
anxiously into one another's faces. But, as if Ishmael too had heard
it, and wished to reassure them, there came the sound of his voice,
calling back to them from the hidden pathways.

"God bless him!" exclaimed the squire, a smile for a moment crossing
his anxious and clouded face.

"Ay!" cried Chipchase. "He was as good a lad as ever breathed before
he went to gaol for stealing them pheasant's eggs; and old Ruth, his
mother, you might trust her in a room full of golden guineas. She's as
good an old soul as ever lived. Ishmael said she was a-dying, didn't
he, sir?"

"Yes," answered the squire.

"And she'd send him away from her to save Nutkin's little lad!" said
Chipchase. "That's what I call being a Christian. Any minute might
bring the roof over his head, and bury him alive; and old Ruth knows
it. But if any soul in Broadmoor believes in God, it's Ruth; and,
please God, I'll be a better man myself from this day forth."

The farmer's voice trembled as he finished speaking, and he turned his
face away from the light, ashamed to let his neighbours see how much he
felt.

"Old Ruth's had a hard, bitter life," said Mrs. Chipchase, sobbing;
"she was near brokenhearted when Ishmael went to gaol; and she's never
been the same woman since. He was like the apple of her eye, Ishmael
was; and he'd worse luck than any of her children, thanks to Nutkin,
I always said, and always shall say to my dying day. What was a boy's
taking a few paltry eggs, I'd like to know?"

"I'll treat him like my own son," muttered Nutkin, not looking up.

"We must make it up to him," added the squire. "If I'd known he was a
good lad, he should never have gone to gaol."

"Hush!" cried Elsie, who was standing beside Mrs. Chipchase.

Instantly there was a breathless stillness in the cave, and every eye
was turned towards the low outer entrance, through which they could
hear the dragging of weary footsteps. Bent almost double, and tottering
as if every step must be the last, came old Ruth herself.

"Where's Ishmael?" she asked, looking round at her neighbours' faces
with eyes dim and glazed.



CHAPTER VIII.

GOING HOME.

WHEN Ishmael had obeyed her, and gone away from her death-bed, Ruth
had for a little while lain still in utter solitude. After the echo
of Ishmael's and Elsie's footsteps had died away, not a sound had
reached her ears. She was accustomed to be alone; but this loneliness
seemed terrible in her last hours. An unutterable yearning came upon
her to see her boy once more, to know what he was doing, and what was
befalling him. He had gone into danger at her bidding; and until she
knew what became of him, she felt as if she could not turn her thoughts
even to the God in whom she trusted. If only Humphrey would come home,
she would prevail upon him to follow Ishmael to the cave, and bring
back word, or send some one to tell her what was going on.

How could she die in peace whilst her boy was in instant danger? She
lifted herself up, and strained her ear to catch some distant sound
of voices or footsteps, but there was nothing save utter silence and
solitude.

Then a feverish strength, the strength of the dying, came to her. To
be somewhere near where Ishmael was, to have faces about her, and hear
the voices of her neighbours, seemed absolutely needful to her. With
feeble, yet hurried hands, she dressed herself in the poor old clothing
she had laid aside for the last time, and with faltering feet she
descended the steep ladder.

The fresh air of the evening blowing softly in her face revived her,
and made her feel as if it had only been because she had been lying
in bed in the hot, dark loft that she had thought herself dying. But
as she crept on through the tangle of brushwood, with barely strength
enough to part the hazel twigs which beset her path, the numbing hand
of death weighed more and more heavily upon her. She heard the voices
of her neighbours passing to and fro in the woods, but she could not
call loudly enough to make them hear.

The thrushes sang in the topmost branches of the trees, where they
could yet see the lingering sunset light, but below her path was all
in darkness, and the power of seeing was fading out of her eyes.
Half-blind, stumbling over the roots of the trees, fainting with
weariness, yet urged on by her passionate love for her son, Ruth
reached the cave at last. She was come to die somewhere near where
Ishmael was.

"Didn't he say his mother lay a-dying?" exclaimed some of the crowd, as
they fell back to make way for her.

But as soon as they caught sight of her face by the light of the
lanterns, they knew that she was dying. She tottered forward with
stumbling feet to the end of the cave, and sunk down on the ground,
breathing fitfully, whilst her sunken eyes gleamed with a bright light.

Nutkin shrunk away in awe of her; but she smiled faintly, and beckoned
with her hand that he should watch and listen still at the post he had
held since Ishmael had entered the old quarry. But he stood, pale and
panic-stricken, looking down upon her as if she had been one come back
from the dead.

"Ruth," cried Mrs. Clift, the schoolmistress, coming forward from among
the villagers, "how did you get here?"

She sat down on the ground beside her, and drew the grey old head upon
her lap; and Ruth looked up thankfully, and summoned all her failing
strength to answer.

"I was afeared," she whispered, "never to see Ishmael again. And God
helped me. The poor lad 'ud fret so if he never saw me again; and it
'll be easier to die here than all alone at home yonder."

"Some of us ought to have thought of you," said the schoolmistress.

"It's best here," she whispered near Ishmael. "God's been very good to
me all my life; and He's very good to me now I'm dying. I'd rather wait
here for him to come back than be anywhere else in the world. Only I
shall miss seein' Humphrey, and he was a good husband to me once."

"Ruth Medway," said the squire, speaking slowly and distinctly, that
she might hear him, "don't you be troubled about your son. I will see
after him, and make a man of him; I promise you solemnly."

Ruth looked up inquiringly into the squire's face; an unfamiliar face,
looking blurred and misty to her failing eyes.

"Who is it?" she asked.

"The squire," said the schoolmistress, gently.

"I thank you humbly, sir," she said, making a great effort, "but it's
too late now, I'm afeared. He's goin' away to a country where there's a
better chance for him as soon as I'm gone. He won't leave me, sir, not
as long as I live, if he starves for it. But he'll go as soon as I'm
dead."

"I'll make it worth his while to stay at home," said the squire.

"There won't be no home when I'm gone," murmured Ruth; "he's never had
a home these five years; like Him that had no place to lay His head."

She closed her eyelids, and lay still, breathing heavily and fitfully;
whilst all around her, her old neighbours looked on in mournful silence.

"He's long in coming," she murmured at last, "and it's growing dark,
very dark. It's time to sing, 'Glory to Thee;' it 'll cheer him maybe,
wherever he is. Only I can't begin."

"She wishes us to sing 'Glory to Thee,'" said Mrs. Clift, looking round
at the circle of grave and sorrowful faces surrounding them; "she says
it will cheer Ishmael; and it will, if he can only catch a distant
sound of it. Some of you belong to the choir; please start it, for I
cannot."

Her voice was broken and low; and for the first two or three lines
the hymn was sung very tremulously by the villagers. But Ruth's eyes
brightened, and a smile broke over her grey and withered face, as the
familiar strain and the old words reached her dull ear. Her lips moved,
and now and then the feeble whispering of a word or two was heard by
the schoolmistress.

But when the "Praise God, from whom all blessings flow" had been
sung in a loud, clear, hearty chorus of every voice, there came, in
the silence that followed, a sound as of an echo repeating it in the
winding galleries of the old quarry. Ruth lifted up her head, and with
sudden strength raised herself to her feet, and leaned against the
opening to listen.

"I can hear him," she said, joyously, "and I shall see him again! I bid
him go, for I was afeared he hadn't forgiven Nutkin; but my heart went
with him. He's the only one of 'em all as cares for their old mother;
it's the way of young folks," she added, as if to excuse them herself;
"but Ishmael was loth to leave me, for fear I should die afore he got
back. But I'm here, Ishmael, my lad; I'm close beside thee. Thee and me
'll see each other again."

She sunk back slowly to the ground; and the neighbours gathered round
her again. She was only a poor old toiling woman, for years well-known
to them all, and little thought of; but there was not one of them who
did not grieve for her, or say to themselves how they could have made
her hard life a little easier for her. Nutkin knelt down beside her,
and his red sunburnt face looked more full of life and health than ever
beside her thin, pinched, pallid features.

"Ruth, forgive me!" he said. "I'd rather have had my right hand shot
off, if I'd ha' known it before. It were my wicked hatred as did it.
I'd ha' winked at any other lad robbing a pheasant's nest; but I hated
the very name o' Medway."

"I never thought myself as there were anything to forgive," she
answered. "It's the law, I know; and the justices are wise men. But
Ishmael couldn't forgive it, not till now."

But before any one could speak again, there came a shout through the
narrow opening, and the sound of a child's voice calling "Father."

Ruth lifted up her head again, and turned her smiling face to the
opening.

"He's coming," she said. "God is very good to us."

Yet a few minutes passed away, long, slow minutes, before they could
hear Ishmael's footsteps, and his voice speaking gently to the child,
who was chattering back again, as if he felt no fear of him, or of the
strange place they were in.

Very soon the child's tear-stained face was seen crawling back through
the archway; yet no one stirred or spoke but Nutkin, who caught his boy
in his arms, and hushed him into silence.

Ishmael was coming back; and his old mother was leaning forward with
her eager, dying face, waiting to see him once more. The lad crept
out slowly and reluctantly, unwilling to face so many of his old
neighbours, and anxious to get away out of sight. His dazzled eyes saw
nothing but a cluster of faces about him; and he did not perceive his
mother until her feeble voice broke the utter silence which astonished
and affrighted him.

"Ishmael!" she called.

"Mother!" he cried, in a loud, shrill tone of surprise and gladness, as
he flung himself upon the earth beside her, and put his arm about her,
drawing her head down upon his breast.

"I couldn't keep away," she murmured, "and God helped me to come. Be
good, Ishmael. God sees us, every one, always. I shall watch for thee
on the door-sill—to come into the Father's house—boldly—where He's gone
to prepare a place—and then we'll be at home again—with Him."

The words dropped slowly, one by one, from the failing lips, which
were growing stiff with death; and the bright light in her sunken eyes
flickered and died out. But there was still a faint, patient smile on
the wrinkled face, and as Ishmael called to her for the last time, in a
voice of bitter grief and loneliness, she tried to raise her head, and
look again into her boy's face. "Ishmael," she whispered, "because the
Lord has heard thy affliction."



CHAPTER IX.

A NEW HOME.

IT was a solemn and almost speechless procession that marched through
the midnight woods, waking up the sleeping birds in their nests, and
frightening timid rabbits in their burrows. The moon shone down from
the cloudless sky, filling the open spaces with a white light, but
deepening the shadows where the hazel bushes grew thickest.

Elsie walked beside Ishmael with her hand in his; remembering, oh! how
keenly, that day five years ago, which had laid the foundation-stone
of all his sorrow. But beyond the present sadness there shone a bright
hope in the future, though he could not at this moment catch its light.
Only a few days, and she and her mother were going to sail for America;
and now, when Ishmael had seen his mother's feeble worn-out body laid
in the old churchyard, he would be free to go with them, and begin his
new life in a new country.

They found old Humphrey lying in a drunken sleep on the damp floor
of the hut, at the foot of the ladder, which he had not been able to
climb up; and they had to drag him on one side to carry their burden
to its resting-place in the loft overhead. He was an old man, with his
brain softened and soddened with drink, and he could not be made to
understand what had happened, or be persuaded to let Ishmael remain
even for a few hours in his old home.

It was only now and then, when his father was away during the few days
that intervened before the funeral, that he could steal in to look at
his mother's calm and placid face, from which the wrinkles, graved
sharply on it by many troubles, seemed almost smoothed away. But every
house in the parish was open to him, the castaway who had been driven
from his home, and thrown upon the world.

He followed his mother to the grave, and stood for the last time amid
his father and brothers. There was a whole crowd of villagers and
neighbours gathered about the grave; and Nutkin was there with the
little boy whom Ishmael had sought and found in the windings of the old
quarry.

"I'd like to shake hands with all the Medways," said Nutkin, as the
crowd began to melt away, "and let bygones be bygones. And, Ishmael,
the squire bid me say, is there nothing as he can do for you; nothing
as 'ud make it worth your while to stay at home, 'stead o' going to
America?"

"Nothin'," answered Ishmael; "there's no home for me now mother's gone.
It was home, sweet home, and I shall never have another."


But ten years after, when Ishmael came back to England, not to stay,
but only to visit the old place, he had made a home for himself,
with Elsie in it for his wife. He owned a farm of his own, and was
prospering in every way. He found the old hut fallen into ruins,
for his father had died in the workhouse the year after he had left
England: and no one had lived in the desolate hovel since.

The old door-sill was there yet, though the thatched roof had long ago
mouldered away; and he could almost fancy he saw his mother sitting
there, and looking out for him.

The trees behind the ruins tossed their green branches in the wind, and
the blue sky, flecked with clouds, shone above them, as in the bygone
days. There were the old pleasant sounds, the song of the birds, and
the hum of insects, and the rustling of myriads of leaves; but still
it was no more home. His mother, who had made this poor hut a home for
him, was no longer there.

"I remember," said Elsie, softly, with her hand in his, "how she said,
'I shall watch for thee on the door-sill, to come into the Father's
house, boldly, where He's gone to prepare a place; and you and me 'll
be at home again, with Him.'"



                               THE END.



                        —————————————————————

     Butler & Tanner, The Selwood Printing Works, Frome, and London.









*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK "NO PLACE LIKE HOME" ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


